troubleshooting (#638)
cylc/cylc-doc: src/troubleshooting.rst

traceback.

Likely causes:

* There is a network issue.
* TCP ports are not open (zmq communications).
* Non-interactive SSH has not been correctly configured (ssh communications).

.. rubric:: If your platform uses pull communication:

Firstly, check the polling interval, it's possible that the scheduler has been
configured to poll infrequently and you need to wait for the next poll, or use
the ``cylc poll`` command (also available in the GUI).

Use the ``cylc config`` command to inspect the platform's configuration to
determine the configured polling schedule.

Then check the ``job-activity.log`` file, there may have been a problem polling
the remote platform, e.g. a network or configuration error.

Likely causes:

* The platform is down (e.g. all login nodes are offline).
* There is a network issue.
* Non-interactive SSH has not been correctly configured.

My Job Submit-Failed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A submit-failed job means one of three things:

1. There is a Bash syntax error in the task configuration.

   E.G. the following ``script`` has a syntax error, it is missing a
   ``"`` character:
   
   .. code-block:: cylc
   
      [runtime]
          [[foo]]

>               script = echo "Hello $WORLD

Reviewer: Surely the `"Hello $WORLD` out to have a closing parenthesis?

>               script = echo "Hello $WORLD

Reviewer 2: He's giving an example of a bash syntax error that causes job submit failure. 

My point is, to get that far it needs to pass validation first.

   
   This will result in a submission-failure which should appear in the
   ``job-activity.log`` file (and also the scheduler log) something like this:
   
   .. code-block::

>    
>       /path/to/job.tmp: line 46: unexpected EOF while looking for matching `"'
>       /path/to/job.tmp: line 50: syntax error: unexpected end of file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      [jobs-submit cmd] (prepare job file)
      [jobs-submit ret_code] 1
      [jobs-submit err]
      /path/to/job.tmp: line 46: unexpected EOF while looking for matching `"'
      /path/to/job.tmp: line 50: syntax error: unexpected end of file
      
Cylc checks job syntax just before submission (because active broadcasts may alter task scripting on the fly) and aborts the process if errors are found.
```
I think it's worth adding more context here - it shows that job preparation failed, not execution - which might be expected for a bash syntax error.

2. There was an error submitting the job to the specified platform (including
   network issues).

>    See the ``job-activity.log`` and the scheduler log. The error should be in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See the ``job-activity.log`` and the scheduler log. Diagnostic information should be in
```

   one or both of those files.

3. The platform is not correctly configured.

My Job Failed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This means something went wrong executing the job.

To find out more, see the ``job.err`` file.

If you're struggling to track down the error, you might want to restart the
workflow in debug mode and run the task again:

.. code-block:: console

   # shut the workflow down (leave any active jobs running)
   $ cylc stop --now --now <workflow>
   # restart the workflow in debug mode
   $ cylc play <workflow> --debug
   # re-run all failed task(s)
   $ cylc trigger '<workflow>//*:failed'

When a workflow is running in debug mode, all jobs will create a ``job.xtrace``
file which can help you to locate the error within the job script.

> 

Reviewer: Worth shoehorning a note about `set -eu` in here? Something like:

```suggestion
.. note::

   "My job didn't fail, but should have": 
   
   Bash scripts do not by default fail on error. Use `set -e` to alter this default. 
   
   See :ref:`workflow_design_guide.basic_principles.basic_functionality`

```

Reviewer 2: (Should mention that Cylc job scripts do use `set -eu`, so this advice applies to external scripts called by the job)

> My workflow shutdown unexpectedly
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
My workflow shut down unexpectedly
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Author: Nope, we've added `shutdown` into src/dictionaries/words.

Reviewer 2: I'm not saying "shutdown" is not an accepted word. It's just not correct in this context.

- "shutdown" is a noun - my scheduler suffered an unexpected shutdown
- "shut down" is verb - my scheduler is about to shut down

E.g., microsoft style guide:
> https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/s/shut-down-shutdown

When a Cylc scheduler shuts down, it should leave behind a log message explaining why.

E.G. this message means that a workflow shut down because it was told to:

.. code-block::

   Workflow shutting down - REQUEST(CLEAN)

If a workflow shut down due to a critical problem, you should find some
traceback in this log. If this traceback doesn't look like it comes from your
system, please report it to the Cylc developers for investigation (on
GitHub or Discourse).

In some extreme cases, Cylc might not be able to write a log message e.g:

* There's not enough disk space for Cylc to write a log message.

> * If the scheduler will killed in a nasty way e.g. ``kill -9``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the scheduler was killed in a nasty way e.g. ``kill -9``.
```

> * If the scheduler host goes down (e.g. power off).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the scheduler host goes down (e.g. power off). 
  (Note if this happens you can simply play the workflow again once the host is back up - it will start up from where it left off when the host went down)
```

Author: This should be true for all cases, but probably isn't, so leaving it out for now.

Error Messages
--------------

FileNotFoundError: No such file or directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This is the error message Python gives when you try to call an exectuable which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the error message Python gives when you try to call an executable which
```

> does not exist in the ``$PATH``. It means there's something wrong with the Cylc
> installation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
does not exist in the ``$PATH``. It means there's something wrong with the Cylc
installation or your default environment for non-interactive shells.
```

Author: I don't think that should be relevant here (it may also be inaccurate, e.g. my default environment ... might be ksh not Bash, but Cylc won't use that).

I think what's written covers "you need to install <x>".

E.G. the following error:

.. code-block::

   FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'ssh'

Means that ``ssh`` is not installed.

See :ref:`non-python-requirements` for details on system requirements.

platform: <name> - initialisation did not complete
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This means that Cylc was unable to install the required workflow files onto
a remote platform.

This either means that:

1. The platform is down (e.g. all login nodes are offline).
2. There is a network problem (e.g. you cannot connect to the login nodes).

> 3. The platform is not correctly configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The platform is not correctly configured.  For example, you have not specified a valid install target for Cylc to install workflow files on the platform.
```

``platform: <name> - initialisation did not complete``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This means that Cylc was unable to install the required workflow files onto
a remote platform.

This either means that:

1. The platform is down (e.g. all login nodes are offline).
2. Or, there is a network problem (e.g. you cannot connect to the login nodes).
3. Or, the platform is not correctly configured.

Check the scheduler log, you might find some stderr associated with this
message.

If your site has configured this platform for you, it's probably (1) or (2),
check you are able to access the platform and notify the site administrator as
appropriate.

If you are in the progress of setting up a new platform, it's probably (3).
You might want to check that you've configured the
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[platforms][<platform name>]install target` correctly,
note that this defaults to the platform name if not explicitly set.

``OperationalError: disk I/O error``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This means that Cylc was unable to write to the database.

This error usually occurs if when you have exceeded your filesystem quota.

> If a Cylc scheduler cannot write to the filesystem, it will shutdown. Once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a Cylc scheduler cannot write to the filesystem, it will shut down. Once
```

(Last one of these)

   To ensure Cylc jobs fail when they are supposed to, Cylc configures Bash
   to be a bit stricter than it is by default by running ``set -euo pipefail``.

   .. cylc-scope:: flow.cylc[runtime][<namespace>]

   This only applies to scripts you've configured in the Cylc script
   settings (i.e. `script`, `pre-script`, `post-script`, etc), not to any
   Bash scripts to call *from* the job script.

   .. cylc-scope::

If you're struggling to track down the error, you might want to restart the
workflow in debug mode and run the task again:

.. TODO Update this advice after https://github.com/cylc/cylc-flow/issues/5829

.. code-block:: console

   # shut the workflow down (leave any active jobs running)
   $ cylc stop --now --now <workflow>
   # restart the workflow in debug mode
   $ cylc play <workflow> --debug
   # re-run all failed task(s)
   $ cylc trigger '<workflow>//*:failed'

When a workflow is running in debug mode, all jobs will create a ``job.xtrace``
file which can help you to locate the error within the job script.

My workflow shutdown unexpectedly
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a Cylc scheduler shuts down, it should leave behind a log message explaining why.

> E.G. this message means that a workflow shutdown because it was told to:

Reviewer 2: (See above https://github.com/cylc/cylc-doc/pull/638#discussion_r1583888848 before responding to this)

.. code-block::

   Workflow shutting down - REQUEST(CLEAN)

If a workflow shutdown due to a critical problem, you should find some
traceback in this log. If this traceback doesn't look like it comes from your
system, please report it to the Cylc developers for investigation (on
GitHub or Discourse).

In some extreme cases, Cylc might not be able to write a log message e.g:

* There's not enough disk space for Cylc to write a log message.
* If the scheduler was killed in a nasty way e.g. ``kill -9``.
* If the scheduler host goes down (e.g. power off).

If the issue is external to the workflow, once the issue is resolved it should
be possible to restart it as you would normally using ``cylc play``. Cylc
will pick up where it left off.

Why isn't my task running?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To find out why a task is not being run, use the ``cylc show`` command.

> This will list the task's prerequisites and xtriggers.

Author: Added note to remove this on the "task matching" issue - https://github.com/cylc/cylc-flow/issues/5827

> This will list the task's prerequisites and xtriggers.

Reviewer 2: Update: `cylc show` now works via the datastore, on tasks in  the `n-window`.

Note, tasks which are held |task-held| will not be run, use ``cylc release``
to release a held task.

Note, Cylc will not submit jobs if the scheduler is paused, use ``cylc play``
to resume a paused workflow.

Required files are not being installed on remote platforms
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Cylc installs selected workflow files onto remote platforms when the first task
submits to it.

See :ref:`RemoteInit` for the list of directories installed and how to
configure them.

If something has gone wrong during installation, an error should have been
logged a file in this directory:
``$HOME/cylc-run/<workflow-id>/log/remote-install/``.

> ``If you need to access files from a remote platform (e.g. 2-stage ``fcm_make``),

Author: The files aren't necessarily workflow files.

`fcm_make` is given as an example, this has hit a lot of workflows so it is reasonable to keep the reference.

> ``If you need to access files from a remote platform (e.g. 2-stage ``fcm_make``),

Reviewer 2: I kinda disagree - the Cylc user guide shouldn't really reference undefined terms. But no biggie.

ensure that a task has submitted to it before you do so. If needed you can use
a blank "dummy" task to ensure that remote installation is completed *before*
you run any tasks which require this e.g:

.. code-block:: cylc-graph

   dummy => fetch_files

Conda / Mamba environment activation fails
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some Conda packages rely on activation scripts which are run when you call the
activate command.

> Sadly, some of these scripts don't defend against command failure or unset

Reviewer: Sadly: Over-not sure suitable for style
Unfortunately: Very long.

My suggestion: Don't make a value judgement, Skip the adjective.

> Sadly, some of these scripts don't defend against command failure or unset

Author: "Value judgement" is beneficial here, it emphasises that Cylc isn't being awkward here.

I think this level of language fiddling is a bit too nit-picky, but changed to unfortunately anyway.

> Sadly, some of these scripts don't defend against command failure or unset

Reviewer 2: > I think this level of language fiddling is a bit too nit-picky,

Meh, that's what style guides for written English are for. Using "excessive informality" (as @wxtim put it somewhere else recently?) in technical docs stands out like a sore thumb and distracts from the content.

(see also :ref:`troubleshooting.my_job_failed` for details).

To avoid this, run ``set +eu`` before activating your environment. This turns
off some Bash safety features allowing environment activation to complete.
Remember to run ``set -eu`` afterwards to turn these features back on.

.. code-block:: cylc

   [runtime]
       [[my_task]]
            script = """
               set +eu
               conda activate <my_environment>
               set -eu

               do-something
               do-something-else
            """

Error Messages
--------------

Cylc should normally present you with a simple, short error message when things
go wrong.

To see the full traceback, run the command / workflow in debug mode, e.g. using
the ``--debug`` option.

If you are presented with traceback when you are *not* running in debug mode,
then this is not an expected error, please report the traceback to us.

``FileNotFoundError: No such file or directory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the error message Python gives when you try to call an executable which
does not exist in the ``$PATH``. It means there's something wrong with the Cylc

> installation.

Author: SSH is a dependency of Cylc, so something is wrong with the Cylc installation.

I'm happy with this, if you are not please provide an alternative.

> does not exist in the ``$PATH``. It means there's something wrong with the Cylc
> installation.

Reviewer 2: But it's not a dependency that can be satisfied by "installing Cylc" correctly.  Reductio ad absurdum, but could I install Cylc on MS Windows and claim that there is something wrong with the Cylc installation?

How about this then?
```suggestion
does not exist in the ``$PATH``. It means there's something wrong with the Cylc
installation, or something missing from the environment or system in which Cylc has been installed.
```

E.G. the following error:

.. code-block::

   FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'ssh'

> Means that ``ssh`` is not installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Means that ``ssh`` is not installed or not in your ``$PATH``.
```

Or perhaps:
```suggestion
Means that ``ssh`` is not installed or not accessible in your environment.
```

See :ref:`non-python-requirements` for details on system requirements.

.. _troubleshooting.remote_init_did_not_complete:

``platform: <name> - initialisation did not complete``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This means that Cylc was unable to install the required workflow files onto
a remote platform.

> This either means that:
> 
> 1. The platform is down (e.g. all login nodes are offline).
> 2. There is a network problem (e.g. you cannot connect to the login nodes).
> 3. The platform is not correctly configured.

Reviewer 2: Use of "either" requires "or" as well.

```suggestion
This either means that:

1. The platform is down (e.g. all login nodes are offline)
2. Or, there is a network problem (e.g. you cannot connect to the login nodes)
3. Or, the platform is not correctly configured.
```

Check the scheduler log, you might find some stderr associated with this
message.

If your site has configured this platform for you, it's probably (1) or (2),
check you are able to access the platform and notify the site administrator as
appropriate.

If you are in the progress of setting up a new platform, it's probably (3).
You might want to check that you've configured the
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[platforms][<platform name>]install target` correctly,
note that this defaults to the platform name if not explicitly set.

``OperationalError: disk I/O error``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This means that something was unable to write to a file when it would expect to

> have been able to.

Reviewer 2: I think you're trying to avoid mention the DB to users here?  However, that's an sqlite-specific error, and with disk quota exceeded they might well get other less-specific IO errors first (or as well). I think it would be fine to mention the workflow DB here - no need to explain exactly what it's for.

> This error usually occurs if when you have exceeded you filesystem quota.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This error usually occurs if when you have exceeded your filesystem quota.
```

> If a Cylc workflow cannot write to the filesystem, it will shutdown. Once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a Cylc scheduler cannot write to the filesystem, it will shutdown. Once
```
This has wider implications, so could leave for later. We've all long been using "scheduler" and "workflow" (meaning "running workflow") interchangeably, but I'd prefer not to conflate the two fundamentally different concepts.

you've cleared out enough space for the workflow to continue you should be able

> to safely restart it as you would normally using ``cylc play``, the workflow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to safely restart it as you would normally using ``cylc play``. The workflow
```

> will continue where it left off.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will continue from where it left off.
```

``socket.gaierror``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This usually means that a host could not be found on the network. The likely
cause is DNS configuration.

Cylc is a distributed system so needs to be able to identify the hosts it has
been configured to use (e.g. the servers where you run Cylc workflows or any
login nodes you submit jobs to).

> Cylc expects each host to have a unique and stable fully qualified domain name

Reviewer: Consider

```suggestion
Cylc expects each host to have a unique and stable Fully Qualified Domain Name
```

Author: meh

Reviewer: I went and looked it up. I'm wrong about this.

(FQDN) and to be identifiable from other hosts on the network using this name.

> I.E. If a host identifies itself with an FQDN, then we should be able to look it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I.e., if a host identifies itself with an FQDN, then we should be able to look it
```

Reviewer: ![correct-futurama](https://github.com/cylc/cylc-doc/assets/26465611/36ce81e4-d326-479c-8a67-91bdc1a11abc)

On the other hand you could just skip the Latin _id est_ and say:

```suggestion
That is, if a host identifies itself with an FQDN, then we should be able to look it
```

Reviewer 2: Agreed, at the start of a sentence, needing capitalization, "I.e." doesn't read well.

from another host by this FQDN. If we can't, then Cylc can't tell which host is
which and will not be able to function properly.

If the FQDN of a host is reported differently from different hosts on the
network, then Cylc commands will likely fail. To fix the issue, ensure that the
DNS setup is consistent.

Sometimes we do not have control over the platforms we use and it is not
possible to compel system administrators to address these issues. If this is
the case, you can fall back to IP address based host identification which may
work (i.e. use IP address rather than host names, makes logs less human

> readable). As a last resort you can also hard-code the host name for each host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
work (i.e. use IP addresses rather than host names, which makes logs less 
readable). As a last resort you can also hard-code the host name for each host

For more information, see
:cylc:conf:`global.cylc[scheduler][host self-identification]`.

``failed/XCPU``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``XCPU`` is the signal that most batch systems will use when a job hits its
execution time limit.

Use :cylc:conf:`flow.cylc[runtime][<namespace>]execution time limit` to
increase this limit.

``Cannot determine whether workflow is running on <host>``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When a Cylc workflow runs, it creates a :term:`contact file` which tells us on
> which host and port it can be contacted.
> 
> If the workflow cannot be contacted, Cylc will attempt to check whether the
> process is still running to ensure it hasn't crashed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When Cylc runs a workflow, it creates a :term:`contact file` which tells us on
which host and port it can be contacted.

If the scheduler cannot be contacted, Cylc will attempt to check whether the
process is still running to ensure it hasn't crashed.
```
(Just another example of my complaint above - I think "contacting *the workflow*" is a bit too loose.

If you are seeing this error message, it means that Cylc was unable to

> determine whether the workflow is running. Likely cause:

Reviewer 2: ("the workflow is running" is fine though)
